I'm pleased to present the number one
selling book in America free to choose
its number one in the New York Times
bestseller list and I ought to know and
it is written by the Nobel laureate a
man whose will never be accused of
making economics confusing man who has a
reputation for not only saying what he
thinks but writing what he thinks as
well as he has done in this most
important book title free to choose
please welcome the Nobel laureate in
economics Milton Friedman
you
here he comes again Milton Friedman and
boy does he make an entrance now because
this is a blockbuster book free to
choose which not surprisingly features a
very attractive flattering professorial
picture of our guests on the front we
feminists can only wonder what would we
can only wonder how they would respond
to this the fact that the book is
co-authored by Professor Friedman's wife
Rose and to what location do you suppose
she has been relegated you've got that
wrong don't you know that the best
always comes last ah okay are we all
right let's let's go over this now and
you have to admit the chief prettier you
certainly do have to admit that's not
difficult to admit that at all as a
matter of fact that you you do seem to
have it all professor freedom if it just
take a personal aside here for some you
you well married you married for what
cover D one years forty-one years to the
same woman same well Minotaur we met
down here at the University of Chicago
and my first graduate course in
economics she was a student she was a
student who we were fellow students oh I
see so you never did presume to teach
her that oh no no no we were this is
when I first so that's probably why
you've been married for them and you
also enjoy the prestige of the Nobel
Prize you are the counselor to
presidents and presidential candidates
it's really a wonderful spot to be and
and this is you know this is the last
thing your mother would expect my son
economist to have become a celebrity
you're absolutely right unfortunately
she died many years ago but you know I
want to put one salt note in that people
often fail to distinguish between giving
advice and having it taken mmm-hmm and
your eyes are given advice to many
presidential aspirant it hasn't always
been taken in fact most of the time it
hasn't been I think we can assume that
it's certainly not being taken now well
I haven't given any advice to President
Carter but none has been solicited i
none has been solicited but that that
really doesn't matter because i
published my views in the newt in
newsweek and other areas anybody who
wants to know my opinion during my views
has him readily available nobody has to
call me on the telephone to find out
yeah
only time I talked to President Carter
was in the interim between his
inauguration his election in his
inauguration when there is an absolutely
hilarious incident he tried to call me
to congratulate me on the Nobel award
and he told his secretary to get Milton
Freedman well it so happened there was a
speechwriter in Jerry Ford's white house
called Milton Friedman this is in the
interim after Jerry Ford has been turned
out and all of a sudden the telephone
rings and Milton Friedman and the white
shouts hears president-elect Carter's on
the phone and he thinks Santa Claus is
coming sure he's really this will be the
unprecedented act of being asked to come
on another administration well it turned
out he was really trying to get me and
he finally got me up in Vermont where we
were at the time let me us let me see if
I can express in very imprecise terms
and very briefly what has the this the
core of your statement here a personal
statement we have too much government we
are not allowing the free enterprise
system to work as your as your most
favored historical figure Adam Smith
suggested it would work if we just let
things alone we have too much government
intervention it is interrupting the not
only the wonderful work that the
invisible hand does if we leave it alone
but it's also depriving people of
personal liberties absolutely okay very
good some fill in the blanks no that's a
very good summary there is a very
important role for government to play
but there's such a thing as too much of
a good thing and government has been
growing beyond bounds right now and to
take the simplest measure
the government spending at federal state
and local levels amounts to over 40% of
the income of the people of the country
if you go around and ask people are you
getting your money's worth for that
forty percent of your income which is
being spent on your behalf supposedly by
government there are very few people who
will say yes and they are right we're
not getting our money's worth much of it
is it's not many that it's being wasted
it's that it's being wasted in a very
particular sense you're spending money
to do opposite things here at one place
you're spending we're spending our money
to try to propagandize us not to smoke
in another place we're spending our
money subsidize our growing at the
backhoe now what sense does it make to
spend these streams of money like that
and you can go over and over again and
find exactly the same thing the
government is too big it's too intrusive
it restricts what we can do it's
becoming our master instead of our
servant and we've got to react against
it and cut it down to size
all right let's share with the people at
home just one of the statements of hmm
Adam Smith that you refer to in your
book which of course when I wanted I'm
not going to be able to oh it's on page
10 thank you all right
I've exerted from your book as you have
from Adam Smith so we can both the we
both with apologies to Adam Smith to
whom
from whom permission was not granted for
this but here is what feels pretty good
but he doesn't communicate with the next
world
all right by pursuing his own interest
that is to say his meaning the person
engaged in free enterprise the person
who functions within the capitalist free
enterprise system Adam Smith says he
frequently promotes that of the society
more effectively than when he really
intends to promote it I have Smith says
I have never known much good done by
those who affected to trade for the
public good
meaning spare me from the do-gooders
spare me from the people who intend to
do good Smith is saying if you seek if
you honestly seek your own self-interest
within the free enterprise system
Society will be the beneficiary
a hard thing to but take the last part
of that I've never seen that again I've
never known much good done no I you know
I don't have to see it I've never known
much good done by those who affect it to
trade for affected note he doesn't say
did trade affected to trade for the
public good
now that word affected is a very
important point because you must realize
that people don't always express their
real interests or their real values they
say what they think will be attractive
to the public of art let me give you a
very simple example right now
General Motors one of our major
corporations has come out against the
deregulation of the trucking industry
the trucking industry today is grossly
over regulated it never should have been
regulated at all we never should have
had it brought it under the Interstate
Commerce Commission it was brought under
the Interstate Commerce Commission not
to protect the consumer but to protect
the railroads at the time from the
competition of trucks when they were
first introduced into the 20s right now
there's a move underway to deregulate
trucking the way airlines have been
deregulated there is nobody doubts that
the deregulation of Airlines was a very
good thing for everybody the
deregulation of trucking would be an
equally good thing there are literally
billions of dollars being wasted because
of the monopoly in trucking you're
talking about fees when you talk about
deregulation I assume you would still
have some monitor on weight and can the
trucking industry benefit by using
highways that I am paying for and may
not be using the merchandise I know now
you now have a gasoline tax which covers
the cost of the highways it is
appropriate to charge for the use of the
highways of course they ought not to get
a subsidy I am opposed to subsidies and
I'm opposed to the opposite of the
excess taxes but they do now pay for the
use of the highway through the through
the gasoline tax and they should
continue to do so as to weight limits
that really has nothing to do with the
ICC that has to do with the capacity a
different Road I want to understand you
though that you're not you're not such a
purist as to be impractical you think
you don't think anybody's truck should
drive over anybody's pavement if the
construction isn't prepared to accept
the way no of course not okay perfectly
that's but that applies not only the
trucks it applies to private cars it
applies
gone into a private recreational vehicle
but what you ought to do is to allow
anybody who wants to go into the
business of trucking to do so you know
there are people today who receive
$100,000 a year to give somebody else
permission to use their ICC right to
carry trucks to carry Freight from one
point to another people who make a very
good living without owning a single
truck the total value of these special
permits which have been given to
trucking and enterprises to carry
Freight even amounts literally to
billions of dollars now General Motors
and the trucking industry when they come
down to Washington and say we ought to
continue regulation do they say we ought
to continue regulation in order to
promote our enters mm-hmm what do they
say they say the public will be hurt
they are affecting the trade for the
public good but do you think they're
kidding themselves they're saying we we
don't want the wonderful individual
people in middle America to be hurt and
and you're saying that's not what
they're that's they know they're not
stupid they're not Santa Claus they're
not Santa Claus
they are sepal or promoting their own
interest and they're affecting the trade
for the public good because that's the
way to get things done nobody ever goes
up to Congress and says look vote me a
big bonanza of $100,000 because I'm a
good man and I deserve $100,000 out of
the public purse no he says you should
subsidize x y&z because of poor middle
class Americans or the poor people in
the slums will but will be benefited
from it five so you have two classes of
people the so-called do-gooders you have
the honest sincere people and they
invariably end up being the front men
for private interests they would never
knowingly support that's part of it
what's an example of that an example of
that are the 19th century ralph nader's
who got the Interstate Commerce
Commission established they got the
Interstate Commerce Commission
established supposedly to protect the
consumer no no they the do-gooder
reformers the Ralph Nader types were
sincere they were interested in
promoting the interests of the
and they were complaining that the
railroads were monopolies and they were
charging too high freight rates and we
had to get the government in in order to
to eliminate that exploitation of the
consumer but who benefited from it the
ICC was set up the do-gooder
well-meaning reformers went on to their
next reform and the railroads took over
the ICC and they use the ICC to keep out
competition to raise rates rather than
lower them they used it in the 1920s to
get the control of ICC extended to
trucking because that was the most
dangerous source of competition
so those well-meaning reformers not
because they were bad people but they
ended up being the frontman for special
Anderson you have that over and over
again all right all right I know you've
heard these two incidentally I should
point out about the anise mythic I
on-air is Adam Smith okay all right look
the only frustrating part of a dialogue
with you is it is I want the audience
has a lot of questions for you too and
it's so hard to do this within the
confines of this limited time frame
however how do you sabe and I know
you've answered these questions so you
can hear your teeth crack but how do you
prevent monopolies you've got to have
constraints on monopolies and isn't
United Airlines too big and look what
happened when they went on strike and
should pan absorb national airlines
we're going to have three airlines when
it's all over and we're all going to be
beholden to them there everybody's going
to be impersonal you can see it now on
the airlines nobody looks you in the eye
and they're giving paper cups in
first-class
how's that for elitism but personally I
don't see any objection of paper cups
but let's go back the problem with the
kind of statement you're making is to
distinguish what's true from what's not
true the plain fact is that the main
restriction on the number of Airlines
has been the Civil Aeronautics Board
from the time the Civil Aeronautics
Board took over control of the airlines
in the 1930s until now until the
deregulation they did not authorize a
single new trunk line be cover a trunk
lines was less because they were owned
by the airlines who did wanted more
competition of course now so the
government became in an agency to help
existing airlines not to head exactly
exactly now what happened with
deregulation you filled every seat in
the airplane and you had new airlines
come in the number of airlines has gone
up not down it is true that there are
some proposals to merge United and
national but they're also Penn amber
national I'm sorry but there are also a
bunch of new airlines that are coming
out here's world airways whom you never
heard of before that's offering the G
Clara Freddie Laker Freddie Laker broke
the transatlantic monopoly so the fact
is that the best protection of the
consumer the best offense against
monopolies it let me put it another way
there's an old saying if you want to
catch a thief you set a thief to catch
him if you want to catch a businessman
monopoly you set another businessman to
break it down you don't send the
government civil servant after them the
most effective anti monopoly legislation
you could possibly have would be free
trade okay
now answer this practical question
professor freedom and there are some
angry people would say come down from
your academic tower and tell us how
we're going to get automobile dealers
who really care about servicing the car
as much as they care about selling us
the car tell us how we're going to get
automobile dealers
who-who-who sell us safety with the same
vigor that they sell us cosmetics well
if the public at large really wanted to
bike safety rather than cosmetics it
would be in the self-interest of the
automobile dealers to sell them safety
you have had some automobile companies
that have concentrated on selling safety
and they have not done very well in the
sales you can't blame here you have let
me to give you a very simple example you
have the so-called superba car which is
built by the chequered company that
produces checker cabs caps they
emphasize safety it's a safest car
probably there is built in America they
haven't been able to sell very many if
the the problem with your your talk is
that you're not talking in terms of what
the consumer really wants as judged by
what he's willing to pay for you're
talking in terms of what you think he
ought to want
I am also taught okay so the
underpinning here under underneath your
statement here is the stupid public want
land knownops no sellers and no fight
with blue lights on these cars in the
showrooms and overseas yeah I want one
of those I'm not I've had lobster I'm
not going to call them stupid the public
is entitled to buy what it wants to buy
Who am I to say whether those tastes are
better or we're I mean my take what's
your conclusion on a person who's more
interested in the style of a car than
whether or not the baby's protected
after the collision well that's stupid I
think he has every right to pursue his
own objectives in his own taste and I
have every right to try to persuade him
he's wrong okay but if I can't persuade
him do I have the right to force him now
you don't bring in the baby because that
raises another and an extraneous and
very difficult issue because I am I will
agree with you he does not have the
right to put a baby like what I'm gonna
create that's right that's a different
question a third party effect is
different
I trust you wouldn't pass a law to
oblige babies to be constrained in cars
no I probably would not but I think that
I'm very comfortable in saying no no no
I'm comfortable but what I would do is I
would say that any parent who nhi Piron
ought to be subject to suit and to being
sent to jail if a child has been damaged
because of
parents right are you willing to pay the
prosecutor that it's going to take to
develop the evidence that the mother
didn't place the carpet baby properly in
the car and the bureaucracy that will
accompany the enforcement of the law
which yeah that you can't unfortunately
is so they for it I'm not as I said
there are like not a lotta reasons I'm
not an anarchist okay I believe that
government has a very important role but
it's a limited role okay and because
we've been trying to extend the role we
haven't been doing what government ought
to do as well as it does as it should
we've been doing a terrible job on what
ought to be the first function of
government the first function of
government is to protect the nation
against foreign enemies and to protect
individual citizens against assault by
their fellow citizens and we've been
doing a terrible job on both ends and in
that in that goal you are you are
aligned with John Stuart Mill absolutely
not bad company and I want to show you
what I've taken out of your book you've
quoted million I'm glad to see you've
read the page to write my attitude to
makes Judah alright that's tough this is
a long hour I'll tell you okay here it
is John Stehr the sole end for which
mankind are warranted this looks
grammatically incorrect would stay with
us individually or collectively in
interfering with the liberty of action
of any of their number is self
protection the only purpose for which
power can be rightfully exercised over
any member of a civilized community
against his will is to prevent harm to
others and then okay the only part of
the conduct of anyone I'm sorry his own
good either physical or moral is not a
sufficient warrant in other words let's
understand that for my own good for my
own good the government cannot pass what
would what would be called
forcible action in other words in other
words here's here's the way I can up
youth a person ought to be able to kill
themselves they have the right to commit
suicide is it natural human run it's
your it's your life it's your life now I
want the government to spend any money
to prevent you from doing this
absolutely no
now I am in fact obviously I as a friend
of yours will try to prevent you if you
were a friend of mine and you suddenly
got to a bridge and we're going to jump
over I would certainly rush over and
grab you and pull you up but you don't
want public money will you be from doing
well I would go Father no no I want to
go farther on a personal basis I would
reason with you I would argue with you
but let's suppose after I had reasoned
with you after I'd argued with you I had
failed to persuade you do I have the
right to use force to prevent you from
disposing of your own life the clearest
changes I think I certainly do know I
certainly do not and you do not and
certainly you do not have the right to
put your hands in the pockets of other
people in order to prevent somebody from
doing something in his own value system
now you know it's an interesting thing
every time you bring up issues like this
people don't recognize what's been
happening where is the rate of suicide
highest is it in the countries that are
free enterprise countries or is it in
socialist countries Sweden has the
highest rate of suicide of any of the
Western countries that last time I
looked at the figures maybe they've
changed why I don't mean why but it's an
interesting thing interesting
observation well that Sweden is one of
the most government control government
kind of socialist countries in the world
yeah but that hasn't prevented people
from committing suicide yeah but but the
problem we take the simpler cases don't
think it lets this play has to be made
the problem with your point is that that
this is hardly any more the best
representative example of what the free
enterprise system ought to be so you
yourself are America's severus critic
you think we've blown Adam Smith's
theory here in America so we should have
people jumping off bridges left and
right here because it's a bad how do you
do well we do look at another game the
point you just no no it doesn't because
we have become so socialists look at the
per extent to which people all I see are
opting out of the world by going in for
drugs by going in for various other
activities of this kind which are a
delayed form of committing suicide yes
one of the problems of our society is
that by having
all responsibilities assigned to the
government we have removed the pressure
on individuals to be responsible for
themselves to feel that they have a set
of values that they are entitled to
pursue so that no no I don't believe
there I assume then that if somebody
wants to smoke marijuana that's their
business business absolute are we going
to take that to heroin and it did
absolutely now there let me go back on
that one because that's a very
interesting thing even if on ethical
principles you believe it is right to
prevent somebody else from smoking
heroin as a matter of expediency it's a
terrible mistake the larger those
jumping off the bridge no no I don't
mean that I mean it's a terrible mistake
for society to render heroin illegal
because that increases a harm which era
one does why do we have so much crime in
the inner cities and in the cities over
50% of it is attributed to crime for the
sake of acquiring money to buy heroin
because why is heroin so expensive
because it's illegal we went through
this with prohibition whether you
believe it's right or wrong to prevent
people from drinking alcohol we had the
experience with prohibition in which we
found that it did more harm than good
and a lot of guys got shot in the garage
a lot of guys got shot in the the more
important the basic respect for law was
eroded law-abiding people who would
never ordinarily have broken the law
broke the law in order to get a drink
because they knew that the that the law
enforcement agencies could not possibly
enforce with any efficiency the laws
against the law of the Prohibition look
the reason they couldn't enforce it was
because it wasn't publicly back if the
90% of the public had been in favor the
prohibition law you could have enforced
but I'm promising you 90% of the public
it right now is in favor of enforcing
prohibition against heroin and you
cannot enforce it I agree I was
understating my case even with 90% of
the people you can't enforce it and it
does vastly more harm today because it
is illegal than it would do if it were
legal let me point out for a moment then
more lives are lost each year through
drinking alcohol than through
but what if there's a case if you're
going to make the case for preventing
heroin on the basis of saving lives
there's a much stronger case for
prohibition of alcohol but that there
would be some who would argue that to to
relax law enforcement or to take away
law enforcement pressure on heroin trade
is to ensure that heroin deaths will
meet and exceed alcohol death on the
contrary it would reduce the number of
paralegals why would it reduce the
number of heroin deaths in the first
place many of the death comes come from
impure all tolerated heroin or needles
that are contaminated in the second
place as we found in prohibition the
fact of prohibition encouraged
alcoholism rather than the opposite to
the young people in particular it became
an adventure to go out and get drugs to
go to a speakeasy today with heroin
illegal it pays a heroin pusher to
create an addict because given that it's
illegal if he it's worth his while to
spend some money on getting somebody
else hooked because once hooked he has a
captive audience if heroin were readily
available everywhere it wouldn't pay
anybody to create an addict because the
Phatak could then go anywhere to buy it
you have had experience with this
Britain has had legalized not heroin in
general but they have had an arrangement
under which certified addicts can get
heroin from physicians on prescription
iesson it's done very much less harm
than our system has I have no apologies
for believing that far less harm would
be done to this country by legalizing
heroin than is now being done by trying
to enforce heroin prohibition I assume
like the baby in the car you would
support legislation prohibiting the sale
of heroin and other addictive substances
to juveniles well that's a very hard
question I think it is a there is a
different case for juveniles but whether
you could really handle the question
that's a question of expediency not a
principle if I thought I could enforce
it I would be willing to say that for
juveniles but I'm not sure I could
enforce it and I'm not sure when I
looked into it I wouldn't decide I did
more
than good even there you'll agree that
this is the issue that lays bare eye the
whole notion of your personal statement
and this is where we get to the
practical realities of sweat and blood
everyday life with parental anxiety
where are my kids what are those sirens
who's selling what to whom what are they
doing in the car who's sniffing smoking
drinking what is happening out there and
for all of the adulation that you've
received standing ovations everywhere
you go this is a very difficult platform
for you to I don't believe I don't
believe so because I believe it
corresponds to the real understanding
and interests and beliefs of the vast
majority the American people I think
that you have to distinguish between the
attitudes of the public at large and the
attitudes of a relatively small group of
people who have been trying to persuade
the public to have different views I
know that dr. Friedman and look at
prohibition yeah I am worried okay Adam
why did you get it adopted in the first
place if the people in this audience who
are predominantly female will pardon me
it was only adopted because the young
males were away in France during World
War one and the women of the country
voted in prohibition now that's neither
good nor bad it's a pure statement a
historical fact yeah the irony though
let's not let's not miss the irony here
the irony is that you are the darling of
the conservative or the of almost is
there anybody left who doesn't think we
have too much government and you are as
eloquent a spokesman against that abuse
as there is walking around today you are
also on record as supporting the
candidacy of Ronald Reagan yes and do I
have to tell you what happens to Ronald
Reagan's candidacy if he so much as
breeds agreement to the statements
you've just made about drugs well
fortunately one of the great virtues of
being a college professor is that you
can say exactly what you believe and
what you mean I'm not running for office
I've never run for office I have no
desire to run for office and so I regard
it as a great luxury that I could be a
respond
we'll be back
I just don't believe that you can take
away laws I have children if I don't
tell them what to do and how to raise
them I they won't know what we expected
my feel there's nothing I guess you
telling your kids with but I met you you
compare the government to that telling
us what to do in deregulation everything
I think we have to have something to go
by
well but you see what you're expressing
is precisely the paternalistic view of
government that I object to I don't
believe government is a mother of
children I don't believe government is a
father of children I believe government
is a way in which you and I and our
fellow citizens achieve certain things
jointly that we can't achieve separately
and I believe it is your responsibility
as a mother to bring up your children in
accordance with the values you believe
and I believe it's a cop-out for you to
say I want the government to do that for
me
no but there's so you were talking about
suicides and how if you had a friend who
is going to commit suicide people who
commit suicide are very lonely people
they usually don't have people to turn
to so if you can help them with
counseling which the government would
fund that would save a life which is
very dear it there are different ways to
achieve that most counseling groups for
suicides in fact are not financed by
government money first of all the
government doesn't have any money only
people have money the government only
gets money by putting its hand in your
pocket and taking it out if you believe
if you believe in the desirability of a
counseling agency to counsel suicides
more power to you get together with
friends organize it finance it on your
own and if the government didn't take as
much money out of your pockets as it
does you'd be better able to do it it's
a way and also the fewer lonely people
and less suicide that's right doing all
right have a slowly really come along
we're getting there Phil okay all right
uh yes ma'am you want Stan please we're
in Chicago with the professor Milton
Friedman if since you do like Ronald
Reagan and let's say he wins the
election and he chooses you as his chief
economic adviser what would you do to
restore our economy back on the right
jaqen would you put us on a gold
standard or could you put us on a gold
standard when you've asked three
questions and I'll try to answer all
three of number one I have been offered
the chairmanship of the Council of
Economic Advisors in the past and I have
refused it and I guarantee you I would
refuse it again because you feel that
it's what your something essentially and
I believe that I personally can be more
useful outside the government that I can
inside it's a very important job there
are many able people who can do the job
I don't believe that's the way I can use
my abilities in my interests most
effectively I want to remain a
responsible they you see what I mean by
that if you're in that kind of a
position it's right and proper that
you're part of a team and if the team
decides on something you don't agree
with you either go along with it or you
quit well I would rather stay on the
outside where I can express my own views
and I believe I am more effective in
that way then I personally would be
inside the government so I have no
doubts about that but number two let me
answer your second two questions what
measures should the government take to
try to restore economic health to the
United States and I have very little
doubt about what the major measures
there but let me say first you're not
going to do it overnight we've gotten
into our present pickle because of three
decades of mismanagement of the economy
and we're not going to get out of it in
six months but what you have to do is
number one you have to move to cut down
government spending to hold down the
rate of growth of government spending in
dollars and to cut it in terms of
purchasing power number two you have to
have a restrained monetary policy not a
shock treatment not an over not a real
cut in the quantity of money but to hold
down and have a gradual reduction in the
rate of monetary growth number three you
have to eliminate as many of the
regulations that now bedevil the economy
as you possibly can the most important
area there is the energy area we have
created the energy mess because of
governmental intervention the most
effective measure we could take for both
foreign policy and domestic policy would
be to get rid
of the Department of Energy to get rid
of this mislabeled windfall profits tax
to let the private enterprise economy go
to work to produce the energy that we
need now on your last question I do not
believe it is either feasible or
desirable to establish a gold standard
under current circumstances the gold
standard served well in the 19th century
if you could restore the conditions of
the 19th century namely a situation in
which federal government spending was 3%
of national income I'd be in favor of a
gold standard and some of your
detractors would want you to know that
the writings of your hero Adam Smith
took place as well in the 19th century
no no it didn't in the 18th century
all right then my point then my point my
point is even more valid how if the gold
standard is no longer applicable given
the modern nature of economics how can
we expect Adam Smith's writings to be
well the principle which are in an older
as you fall tonight well you know the
Bible is 2,000 years old
and I don't think you would say that the
principles of the Bible are not
applicable but the way you apply them
are different the circumstances are
different the principles of Adam Smith
are just as applicable today but they
have to be applied differently because
the circumstances are different and
those principles made sense of the gold
standard in the 19th century and don't
in the 20th we'll talk later about the
fairness of referring to the Bible when
arguing with the pressure
you want to get rid of the FCC - sure of
course get rid of the Federal
Communications Commission if you can by
if you would regulate I mean we got to
have some control over the airway no now
what I would do would be to have the
Federal Communications Commission have a
big auction at which they would action
off all the present television and radio
life and then only fat cats would own
radio television station which many up
detractors say is the situation now yeah
well first place there are many of them
and many people could come in and
compete with them do only fat cats you
talk we were talking about Airlines only
fat cats only airlines no anybody here
can buy shares stock in the United
Airlines or in TWA in the same way with
so they'll be publicly held and
stockholders could dissent if they
didn't like the commercials if the
commercials were too long I could sell
if they thought that the the company
what the station wasn't doing a good job
they could sell their stock much more
effective than voting in Washington
because each individual separately can
decide what to do but more important if
you once put it into made it into
private property it would be not subject
to the Fairness Doctrine you would have
the same kind of Free Press on radio and
television that you now have in the
newspapers but you got to trust me to
put all of the candidates on my program
or am I just going to put my favor you
put your favorite on and some other
station will put its favorite on you do
not get fairness by every individual
program being fair you do not get
fairness by every individual station get
fairness in any event I'm not in favor
of fairness I'm in favor of freedom and
freedom is not fairness fairness means
somebody has to decide what's fair and
that means the FCC people have to decide
what's fair I didn't want the FCC people
to decide for me what I should listen to
or here and you wouldn't be able if the
public at large didn't agree with your
choices you'd be out of business
yeah so you were you you know it's a
funny thing people think that if the
appearance of power versus a reality of
power it looks like as if you have a lot
of power over what you put on your shelf
but you don't really because because if
you didn't appeal to the public if these
people didn't like you do a marvel
yeah I'm not questioning that but you do
a marvelous job because you have found
an audience for your Donna so in other
words my power comes to the people is
your classroom and if I just put on all
of my favorites then the public will
clearly see the Donny who was sold out
in there go there right look I've been
reading your book it's a good book and I
recommend it to you just as he
recommended mine but in that book you
point out the difficulties you had
getting into New York yes
suppose you had had to have government
permission to go into New York do you
think you would have had it any easier
do you think you could have had as much
independence as you've had mm-hmm and
under the friedman laissez-faire
Broadcasting System there would have
been more opportunities for this
happening know how to do absolutely
there would have been more stations then
what would have been instead of three
big networks you would have had a much
broader group of stations you would have
been able to break you in much sooner I
don't know whether that's a good thing
or a bad thing but it would have
happened ah is can we take one here we
got a bit is the caller there yeah just
hang on a second I'm doing my best
we'll be back in Justin
Milton Friedman is reachable via United
States mail government-controlled as it
is and at the Hoover Institution
Stanford California the zip there is
nine for 305 okay that's easy enough in
an age of bureaucratic numbers
mumbo-jumbo this arel relatively simple
address let him know how you feel I know
you're there caller at Stanford
California just one I've got to get this
in let's now one more time off the ivory
tower you're you your statement against
government growth and too much spending
do I assume that you bring the same free
to be irresponsible statements against
military spending well about forty
billion dollars you say a hundred and
forty billion twenty fifteen years ago
military spending was over twice as much
as a spending of hgw today the spending
of hgw is over twice as much is about
twice as much as military spending
fifteen twenty years ago before Vietnam
military spending was nine percent of
the national income today it's between
four and five percent I said earlier the
two basic functions of the government or
to protect the nation against foreign
enemies yes and to protect the citizen
against his fellows military spending is
essential for the first of course if we
could do it in a private enterprise way
it'd be a lot cheaper would you like to
try I have never been able to figure out
a way to turn the military the defense
of the country over to private
enterprise ideal prised anybody
aggressive
professor Friedman there aren't there
are critics who say that it already is
and the theories and old men declare
wars is because they have a financial
investment in the companies that make
bombs and bullets and guns and uniforms
and all it takes to get the I don't
believe that for a moment I don't doubt
that the people who have those interests
try to exert their influence in that way
but this is so serious and so important
to matter that I really think it's no
lasting on what's going on no one is
saying it's a conscious effort but but
the fact that the profit is there has
got to influence behavior it's going to
mean that indecision I mean that's the
reason why our military spending has
gone down so sharply
140 billion isn't enough for you do you
know how much an aircraft carrier cause
I got this just today this week from
Senator Proxmire five billion for the
boat and five billion for the planes on
a ten billion for one boat how do you
feel about that I think it's a it's a
lot too much and might very likely if
you could turn that over to private
enterprise it would cost half as much
but we have to have a strong military
and at the moment let me get to this
because I think it's very important if
this country is fundamentally threatened
in my opinion it is threatened much more
by our weak position and foreign affairs
than it is threatened by any mistakes
that we have made in economic management
we can recover from the mistakes in
economic management but if we put
ourselves in a position and foreign
policy of the kind we've been putting
ourselves in we cannot recover we're
through so one day I'm all that's
directly opposite the statements of many
many honorable reasonable people who are
saying it's the cost of bacon and the
fact that the middle class can't make it
to the next paycheck and the fact that
several thousand people in the
automobile industry are out of work
that's going to threaten the integrity
and strength of this country not a group
of students somewhere it's not it would
you talk about a group of students I'm
not concerned about the group of
students I'm concerned about the Russian
armies on both sides of that straight
I'm concerned about the fact that in our
neglect we permitted the Russian to take
over the base of eight when the British
left it in 1971 and they have built up a
major military base with airplanes and
so on that they are now coming into
Afghanistan they've got both parts of
the Persian Gulf and Upen sirs all right
oh my how unrealistic can you be not to
look at what's been happening to the
relative strength and position of the
Russians on the one hand of ourselves
and the other and do you think they're
spending that money and devoting their
energy to that in order to have it sit
idle alright and what are you going to
do with the workers who built all these
airplanes after the order is canceled by
the government General Dynamics and Fort
Worth Boeing in Seattle
what are you what is the economists
going to do to help the economy the
local economy when suddenly
Big Daddy government cuts off the not a
thing not a thing the and there's no
reason to do anything because all of
those people and the people who bit in
that included in their bids and
allowance for the possibility and the
danger that they would be cut off
and they will have to adjust just as all
the other people have to adjust what are
you going to do for the people who are
out of work when the public and large
suddenly changes from wanting the one
kind of pair of shoes to another kind of
pair of shoes what are you going to do
when the public at large decides it's
it's not going to go in big cars it's
going to go in little cars I don't want
to do a thing I want to let the private
market work the private market system is
a system of profit and loss and the lost
part is just as essential as a profit
part it is a disgrace that we should be
bailing out Christ
Chrysler ought to be allowed to go broke
all right I know the collar is still
there all right I'm gonna try and get
you on I really am and I'm sorry but I
have to break now we'll be yeah in the
free enterprise system call is a tease
we'll be back in a moment
hi I'm glad you waited sorry what you
had a question oh yes I would like to
ask what Professor Friedman what the
average middle-income taxpayer can do to
get to quit being taken to the cleaners
by the IRS unfortunately unfortunately
very little I do not believe that you
can find a solution to that problem as
individuals I think we can find a
solution to that problem as citizens
thanks very much to Milton free yourself
and Alan I think go free to choose the
book don't forget the book I'm happy to
show off the book have a nice day
everybody